What is a Pipe?
A Pipe is usually a hollow cylinder primarily used to transport substances which can flow, such as liquids, gases, slurries, etc. They are commonly used with fittings. Fittings are plumbing systems used to connect straight pipes. Elbows, collars & bends are examples of fittings used commonly with pipes. Pipes may be made of plastic or of metal.
What are the different types of Pipes and where is each of them used?
S no. Type Colour Application
1. PVC- Polyvinyl Chloride pipes Mostly white or light grey Used to carry high pressurized water. Widely used in drain & sewer systems in residences, commercial complexes, resorts, hospitals, academic institutes and industries etc. They are not used for hot water
2. uPVC- Un-plasticized PVC pipes: uPVC- Un-plasticized PVC pipes: White in colour with red, blue or green stripes Are easy to install and are functionally most suitable for plumbing applications, Widely used for cold water distribution systems in homes, offices. They are primarily used for the transportation of & distribution of potable water
3. SWR - Soil, Waste & Rain water Pipes:Pipes are most cost effective & efficient drainage system.
Type A pipes
Type B pipes Dark grey in colour
Light Grey in colour
use in ventilation pipe work & rain water application
use in soil & waste discharge systems
Is color of any significance in Pipes?
Yes, color plays an important role in identification of pipes. While PVC pipes are primarily white in color, SWR pipes are grey in colour. Buildings where dual-water distribution systems are installed, the pipes for each system are identified by colour of pipes.
What is male and female in a pipe?
A Pipe usually has two ends. The narrow end is the female end while the broader end is called the male end.
What is a thread in a pipe?
Thread refers to the circular rings at the ends of a pipe made to fit another pipe into it. They concept is just like a cap and bottle. The thin circular lines which exist on the bottle and the cap are called threads.
What is the meaning of 1 length in different types of pipes?
The standard length of different types of pipes vary:
s.no. Pipes Standard length available
1. PVC pipes 3 and 6 meters
2. uPVC pipes
Schedules ½ “ to 2”
Schedules 1½ “ to 3”
Schedule 4” to 6” and 8”
Schedule 80 and 120 , 8” to 12” with both male and female threaded with one socket/ non threaded come in 6 meters
with both male and female threaded either in standard pipe threads/ non threaded/ trapezoidal or ACME threads come in 6 meters
with or without threads come in 5 meter
3 meters
3. SWR Pipes are 3 and 6 meters with single & double sockets also available in 2, 4 and 6 feet for the ease and convenience of a plumber
What is the significance of SH 40, SH 80 and SH 120 in any pipe?
SH stands for Schedule. The PVC pipes are classified based on their thickness and pressure carrying capacity. SH refers to this thickness and pressure carrying capacity of a pipe. The 3 types of Schedules in which pipes are available are:
SH 40: PVC pipes which are less thick and are suitable for lower pressure applications like residential building projects
SH 80: These are thicker then SH 40 pipes and have more pressure carrying capacity then SH 40 but less capacity and thickness than SH 120. Primarily used for higher pressure applications such as industrial application
SH 120: SH 120 grade pipes are the thickest and have the highest pressure carrying capacity
While making an order, is it the inner diameter or the outer diameter which is to be known?
You should know the outer diameter of pipes of various sizes while placing an order.
What are the different types of fittings?
Wide ranges of fittings are used in plumbing works. Common types of fittings used are:
Couplers:
Elbows:
Y
Tee
Collar
What are the things to keep in mind while purchasing pipes?
Pipes are plumbing materials used for a trouble free water supply and sanitary system in homes and apartments. The following things must be kept in mind while purchasing pipes:
Strength
Water carrying capacity
Life and durability
Make sure that the right type of pipe is being purchased for the right use.
How are pipes & fittings transported by mSupply?
Pipes are available in different lengths based on their type and customer requirement. Fittings on the other hand are smaller items which are ordered in numbers. Depending on the ordered quantity, the same will be transported in either a truck (7 feet to 10 feet ling) or in a canter (14 feet).
The chart below gives us an idea on the material carrying capacity of different vehicles:
Vehicle Type Capacity Standard length available
1. PVC pipes 3 and 6 meters
2. uPVC pipes
Schedules ½ “ to 2”
Schedules 1½ “ to 3”
Schedule 4” to 6” and 8”
Schedule 80 and 120 , 8” to 12” with both male and female threaded with one socket/ non threaded come in 6 meters
with both male and female threaded either in standard pipe threads/ non threaded/ trapezoidal or ACME threads come in 6 meters
with or without threads come in 5 meter
3 meters
3. SWR Pipes are 3 and 6 meters with single & double sockets also available in 2, 4 and 6 feet for the ease and convenience of a plumber
